Andrew Carnegie 

A self-educated "working boy" who loved books, Andrew Carnegie emigrated from Scotland in 1848 and settled in Pittsburgh, Pa. Attending night school and borrowing books, Carnegie went from factory worker in a textile mill to successful entrepreneur and industrialist. He rose to prominence by founding what became the world's largest steel producing company by the end of the 19th century.

Carnegie Technical Schools 

At one point the richest man in the world, Carnegie believed that "to die rich is to die disgraced." He turned his attention to writing, social activism and philanthropy, determined to establish educational opportunities for the general public where few existed.
In 1900, he donated $1 million for the creation of a technical institute for the city of Pittsburgh, envisioning a school where working-class men and women of Pittsburgh could learn practical skills, trades and crafts that would enhance their careers, lives and communities.
"My heart is in the work," he stated, which would become part of the school's official motto.
The Carnegie Technical Schools offered two- and three-year certificates in the arts as well as in engineering disciplines and included a college for women, Margaret Morrison Carnegie College.

Carnegie Tech – Early Years 

Soon faced with the demand for baccalaureate programs, Carnegie Technical Schools began offering bachelor's degrees through its College of Engineering and College of Fine Arts, becoming the Carnegie Institute of Technology, or "Carnegie Tech."
During the first half of the 20th century, with support from Andrew Carnegie and other funders, Carnegie Tech laid the foundation for a school on the cutting edge. Some key developments were:

It expanded from two buildings into an elegant 20th century campus designed in the beaux arts architectural style, housing a wealth of machine shops, studios and laboratories — the hands-on center of learning that persists today.
It pioneered conservatory degree programs in music and drama, in addition to visual art and design programs. The first U.S. drama degree was awarded in 1914 at Carnegie Tech.
It began offering graduate degrees. In 1919, the first doctorate (in civil engineering) was awarded to Mao Yisheng, a student from China.
It laid the groundwork for a research institution, recruiting leading scientists, offering sponsored fellowships with government and industry leaders and pioneering nontraditional interdisciplinary research, which brought together physicists, chemists and metallurgists, for example. Interdisciplinary research would become the hallmark of Carnegie Mellon research.
It initiated the 'Carnegie Plan' in 1938, a new curriculum that required science and engineer students to take courses in humanities and social sciences in order to better understand the needs of society.
Carnegie died in 1919, but his vision for an educated public lived on after him.

Carnegie Tech - Post-war Years 

With the end of World War II, the latter half of the 20th century brought unprecedented growth to Carnegie Tech. In 1956, the arrival of the first IBM computer to campus was revolutionary, initiating a university culture where information technology pervaded virtually all areas of study.
University culture also changed in 1973 when Margaret Morrison closed and women joined their male peers in classrooms and dorms.
The times were changing, and Tech positioned itself at the forefront, opening three new schools:

1948: The Graduate School of Industrial Administration, later renamed the David A. Tepper School of Business, focusing on quantitative analysis and pioneering the field of management science.
1968: School of Urban and Public Affairs, later renamed the H. John Heinz III College, providing graduate training for work in the public sector.
1986: School of Computer Science, pioneering computing and artificial intelligence, led by interdisciplinary efforts of Allen Newell and Herbert Simon.

Carnegie Mellon University 

In 1967, Carnegie Tech merged with the Mellon Institute, a science research center founded by the Mellon family of Pittsburgh, to become known as Carnegie Mellon University. The merger built upon a long history of support from the Mellons.
It allowed Carnegie Mellon to establish the last of its current pillars: the Mellon College of Science and the College of Humanities and Social Sciences, now known as Marianna Brown Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences.
In 2017, Carnegie Mellon celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Carnegie Tech-Mellon Institute merger, revisiting the shared vision of the founders and recognizing the impact it has had, and will continue to have, in the world of higher education, research and discovery.

A Global Impact 

In its 115 years, Carnegie Mellon has soared to national and international leadership in higher education and research. A birthplace of innovation since its founding, it continues to be known for innovation, for solving real-world problems and for interdisciplinary collaboration.
Its alumni can be found across the globe — from Tony Award winners to Nobel Prize and Turing Award winners, from CEOs to entrepreneurs, from professors to artists.
In the 2000s, in response to demand for expanded international educational opportunities, Carnegie Mellon began offering degree programs outside of Pittsburgh.
Today its global presence includes campuses in Qatar and Silicon Valley, Calif., more than a dozen degree-granting locations and more than 20 research partnerships such as Los Angeles; New York City; Washington, D.C.; Australia; China; Portugal and Rwanda.

The Future 

CMU is positioned like never before to meet the challenges of the 21st century. In the coming years, the university will see the largest expansion to the Pittsburgh campus since 1900.
At the intersection of technology and humanity, CMU research, innovation and creativity will continue to guide our future as a world-class university.
As outlined in the Strategic Plan 2025, the university will focus on advancing the individual student experience, the broader Carnegie Mellon community experience, and the social impact of Carnegie Mellon throughout the world.

Carnegie Mellon University has been a birthplace 
of innovation since its founding in 1900.
Today, CMU is a global leader bringing groundbreaking 
ideas to market and creating successful startup 
businesses. Our award-winning faculty are renowned for 
working closely with students to solve major scientific, 
technological and societal challenges. We put a strong 
emphasis on creating things — from art to robots. We 
have become a model for economic development in 
forming partnerships with companies such as Uber, 
Google and Disney. Our students are recruited by some 
of the world’s most innovative companies.
MANAGEMENT 
INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS
U.S. News & World Report, 2022#1
ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE
U.S. News & World Report, 2022#1
AMONG U.S.  
UNIVERSITIES
Times Higher Education  
World University 
Ranking, 2023#19SOFTWARE 
ENGINEERING
U.S. News & World Report, 2022COLLEGE OF 
ENGINEERING
U.S. News & World Report, 2022#1 #4#1SCHOOL OF 
COMPUTER 
SCIENCE
U.S. News & World Report, 2022
UNIVERSITY  
IN THE WORLD
Times Higher Education  
World University  
Ranking, 2023#28TIME-BASED/  
NEW MEDIA
U.S. News & World Report, 2019#11,529  
FACULTY16,779  
STUDENTSGraduate
Undergraduate
117,257 
ALUMNI (LIVING)
85%  U.S. 15%  International35%  U.S. 65%  International
76%  U.S. 24%  InternationalGLOBAL COMMUNITY
Students representing
126 countries
Faculty representing
56 countries
Alumni representing 
148 countries
OF COMPUTER 
SCIENCE’S FIRST-
YEAR STUDENTS  
WERE WOMEN  
IN 2019
Nearly triple the  
national average“ My Heart is in the Work. ”  
 Andrew Carnegie, Founder  
 November 15, 1900
49.8 %
87%  U.S. 13%  InternationalSCHOOLS AND COLLEGES
College of Engineering 
College of Fine Arts
Dietrich College of Humanities  
and Social Sciences
Heinz College of Information Systems 
and Public Policy
Mellon College of Science
School of Computer Science
Tepper School of Business
cmu.edu/assets/pdfs/cmu-fact-sheet.pdf    |   cmu.edu/about/awards.htmlMarch 2020BIG IDEAS THAT SHAPE YOUR WORLD START HERE
1,000+ companies greenlighted 
across the U.S. and internationally 
Cognitive tutors,  which improve 
the math skills of 500,000+ 
students each year 
The first U.S. school to award  
a degree in drama  in 1914
James Gosling (SCS 1983) 
invented the Java computer 
programming language .
The first exclusive higher 
education partner of the Tony 
Awards® , co-creating the first, 
national recognition program 
honoring K-12 theatre educators The first smile in an email , created 
in 1982 by professor Scott Fahlman
Kevlar Fiber , invented by alumna 
Stephanie Kwolek (MM 1946)
The Last Lecture , written  
by alumni Randy Pausch (SCS 1988)  
and Jeffrey Zaslow (DC 1980)
In 1919, CMU’s first Ph.D.  was 
awarded to Mao Yisheng, father  
of Chinese bridge construction. 
Duolingo , invented by professor  
Luis von Ahn (CS 2003, 2005), had  
10 million downloads in 12 months 
and was named Apple’s 2013 app  
of the year.
:-)
LEADERSHIP
Farnam Jahanian   
President
David Coulter  
Chair, Board of Trustees
James H. Garrett Jr.  
Provost2 National Academy of Engineering       3 National Academy of Sciences        4 National Academy of Medicine
 Won by alumni and current/former faculty
The leading university center 
for cybersecurity , providing 
support to more than 110 
centers around the world 
The world’s first university 
robotics department ,  
founded in 1979
Alumnus Andy Warhol   
(CFA1949), pop artist pioneer  
and cultural icon
One of only 29 universities  
invited to be a member of the 
World Economic Forum’s 
Global University  
Leaders Forum
CMU.EDU
ECONOMIC IMPACT
• Attracting major companies  —  
including Google, Intel, Uber and GE —  
to locate operations and create new  
jobs in Pittsburgh
• To date, the CMU community has 
launched more than 400 startups  
and created more than 152 spinoff 
companies .
• Contributing to the cultural and civic life of  
the city with performances , exhibitions  
and research collaborations
13
ACADEMY  
AWARDS65
MEMBERS  
OF NAE2
146
EMMY  
AWARDS20
MEMBERS  
OF NAS3
6
MEMBERS  
OF NAM4
13
TURING  
AWARDS
20
NOBEL  
LAUREATES
58
TONY  
AWARDS
May 2023
